The headline landed in Norway this
morning. The Supreme Court ruled three
to two that the Norwegian state cannot
deny Jehovah's Witnesses their state
subsidy or their registration as a
religious community. After four years of
litigation and around 100 million kroner
of withheld funding, Watch Tower won.
It's heartbreaking and disappointing,
but I can't say it's surprising, and
I'll tell you why. I sat through 40
years of meetings, assemblies, and
special schools. I've been out for about
eight, and in those years I've clearly
seen the playbook Watch Tower has been
writing for exactly this moment, and it
worked precisely as designed. Stay with
me, because the more important part
isn't that they won, it's the way they
won and the two judges who saw through
it.
Here's the case in brief. In 2021, the
state administrator for Oslo and Viken
stopped paying out the annual state
subsidy that Jehovah's Witnesses in
Norway had been receiving for about 30
years. In 2022, that same office went
further. They revoked the religious
community's registration entirely. The
legal hook was Norway's Religious
Communities Act section six, which let
the state deny subsidies and
registration to any community whose
practices seriously violate others'
rights and freedoms. The state's
argument was that the Witnesses'
shunning policy did exactly that. It
violated members' right to leave the
religion freely, and it exposed baptized
minors to what Norwegian authorities
called negative social control and
psychological violence.
In 2024, the Oslo District Court agreed
with the state. During that trial, the
2017 Watch Tower video titled Loyally
Uphold Jehovah's Judgments, Shun
Unrepentant Wrongdoers was shown in open
court. There was testimony from Watch
Tower's side that the video was just a
random example of how some families
might choose to handle things, not an
instruction, not a directive, just an
example.
Watch Tower lost that round and
appealed. In 2025, the Borgarting Court
of Appeal reversed. A unanimous
three-judge panel said the state hadn't
proven its case. The state appealed to
the Supreme Court. In February of this
year, five Supreme Court justices heard
three days of arguments. Former members
traveled from the United States,
Iceland, Spain, Denmark, Finland. They
stood in line at the courthouse before
sunrise to get seats. The hearing
wrapped on February 9th. The verdict
landed today, April 30th, 2026.
So, that's the ground floor. The state
said the practice harms people. The
Witnesses said it doesn't. Five judges
had to decide whose description of
reality the law should rely on. Hold on
to that, because this is where the real
story starts.
Before we look at how the court decided,
you need to understand what Watch Tower
has been doing very deliberately for at
least the last 20 years.
If you've ever read a current Watch
Tower study article on disfellowshipping
or the Elders manual, the book the
elders use behind closed doors when
they're handling a judicial committee,
you'll notice a very particular kind of
language. The official position is that
family ties aren't broken when a
member's disfellowshipped or
disassociates. There's a household
carve-out. Members who live under the
same roof as someone who's been removed
from the congregation can continue to
have what the publications call normal
day-to-day contact. There's a second
exception called necessary family
matters. A member can have contact with
disfellowshipped relatives outside the
household when something practical has
to be handled. If a disfellowshipped
parent gets sick, if financial affairs
need sorting out, that kind of thing.
The publications call this a moral and
biblical duty. Even if you ignore the
guidelines and associate with
disfellowshipped family members rather
than shun them, the Elders book says you
can't be brought before a judicial
committee except under a few specific
circumstances. The judicial committee
generally only applies if you're
associating with a non-family member.
On paper, the position is clear. Watch
Tower doesn't break up families.
Anyone just reading the manual without
any knowledge of the culture could be
forgiven for making the mistake of
believing that.
But anyone who's lived inside this
organization knows that the lived
reality and the paper reality are miles
apart. The household carve-out is
meaningful only if the disfellowshipped
person still lives at home, and most
adults don't.
The necessary family matters exception
is so narrow that Watch Tower showed
that 2017 video where a mother chose not
to answer the phone when her
disfellowshipped daughter called, even
though the mom had no idea if her
daughter was in trouble or dying on the
street. I got an email a few days ago
from a man shunned by his family whose
mother died a month prior, and nobody
bothered to tell him. That wasn't the
first email of that sort I've gotten.
There have been many.
The reframing of shunning as social
distancing, which Watch Tower has been
leaning into in recent years, is exactly
that, a reframing. The behavior on the
ground hasn't changed, only the
vocabulary has.
And here's the thing. Watch Tower knows
the difference between what they write
and what their people do. They have to,
because the entire architecture of the
way they describe this practice is built
around plausible deniability.
Language that lets a member of the
Governing Body or a lawyer in a
Norwegian courtroom point to the
official policy and seemingly honestly
say, "We don't break up families."
I've talked about this before.
In the 1950s, Watch Tower called it
theocratic warfare. They believe
everything outside their walls is ruled
by Satan the Devil, which makes every
institution in the world, including
every court, an enemy of God and an
enemy of theirs, which gives them the
right to lie while claiming it's not
really a lie because those people don't
deserve the truth. I've covered this
extensively in past videos. Watch Tower
hasn't called it theocratic warfare in a
long time, but the behavior hasn't
changed, and Norway's Supreme Court,
like so many other courts, has been
duped by the lie.
Norway's Supreme Court read those
documents. They cited them by name. The
court explicitly placed weight on what
it called the internal guidelines for
handling minors. The majority concluded
that family bonds aren't broken for
relatives outside the household. They
concluded the practice does not meet the
threshold for psychological violence.
They concluded the state hadn't proven
that exclusion creates undue pressure to
remain in the religion.
What the court said, in effect, is this.
We read what Watch Tower wrote about its
own practice, and we don't see a
violation here. The theocratic warfare
worked.
That's the pattern. Now, watch what
happens when you put it next to the
artifact.
Here's what we have on the table. On one
side, the ruling, three judges to two,
finding that the state failed to prove
the Witnesses' practice harms anyone
enough to justify pulling subsidies.
On the other side, the rulebook, the
Elders manual, the published Watch Tower
articles, the 2024 surface-level
rewrites, the 2017 video quietly removed
from jw.org, the 2008 book Keep
Yourselves in God's Love that told
Witnesses to hardcore shun their
families, no social contact, not even a
hello. The decades of paper trail Watch
Tower has been building very carefully
to describe a practice that on the
ground breaks up families.
Read those two things next to each
other, and the truth of what has
happened in Norway is this.
Watch Tower didn't win because the
practice doesn't exist. They won because
they've spent decades
writing it down so that when a court
reads what they wrote, the practice
doesn't appear to officially or counsel,
not law. The rulebook is their defense.
The rulebook says no judicial action
will be taken against family members who
associate with disfellowshipped family
unless they're promoting apostate
teachings or wrong conduct, which we
know means believing anything Watch
Tower doesn't teach or doing anything
Watch Tower disapproves of.
A disfellowshipped family member goes to
a different church now and tells your
Jehovah's Witness relative that they
believe a different doctrine than Watch
Tower teaches because it's based on the
Bible and not on 11 old men's opinion in
New York. Well, they're an apostate now
by Watch Tower design, and the witness
can be brought before a committee if the
elders find out and the witness ignores
her counsel to shun the family member.
If your disfellowshipped relative runs
for local office or starts smoking
cigarettes, moves in with their
girlfriend or their boyfriend, the
Jehovah's Witness relative is now
expected to shun them because they're
violating Watch Tower standards, and
there's a judicial committee waiting if
they refuse.
>> [gasps]
>> Now, if you lived in the world of
Jehovah's Witnesses, you know that if
you associate with a disfellowshipped
family member, even if they're not
considered an apostate or doing anything
wrong by Watch Tower standards, you'll
be seen as spiritually weak, which
carries real social consequences, all
the way up to being soft shunned by the
community.
Other Jehovah's Witnesses won't
associate with you because you're
breaking what they know the real rules
are, but that's not written in the
Elders rulebook. It's something you have
to live in that world to understand.
Now, to be fair, how seriously different
witnesses treat the social rules varies.
Some are more strict, some are more lax.
That's inevitable when it's an informal
social construct rather than a formal
written one.
But the very real consequences have been
attested to by countless former
witnesses who haven't spoken to their
family in years, sometimes decades.
Watch Tower knows all of this, and
they've been using this two-faced
approach to prepare for this defense
since long before this case was ever
filed in Norway. I don't believe for 1
second they didn't see a case like this
coming.
That's the playbook, and in Norway, as
in so many other courts, it worked.
But, and this is the part I want to sit
with, it didn't work on everyone.
Two of the five Supreme Court justices
read exactly the same documents the
majority read. They watched the same
testimony. They heard Watch Tower's
lawyer stand up in court and say
repeatedly that nobody in this
organization is afraid of being excluded
and that family ties are not broken.
And the dissent, the published reasoning
of the two minority judges, says
something very specific. They said
exclusion can lead to loss contact with
family members and that this constitutes
the kind of pressure that infringes a
person's right to leave the religion
freely.
Two judges, reading the rulebook,
refused to mistake the rulebook for the
reality.
I want you to understand what that
means. These are senior justices on the
highest court in Norway. They're not
ex-witnesses. They're not advocacy
voices. They had no horse in this race,
and they looked at what Watch Tower
wrote about itself and looked at what
former members had testified to across
the lower court rounds, and they decided
the published policy wasn't the same
thing as the lived practice.
If you're finding this useful,
subscribe. Videos like this only do work
if they actually reach people. And if
you have documents, internal materials,
or a lead on a story that deserves a
piece like this one, my email is
jonathan.lege podcast@gmail.com.
Credit or anonymous, your call.
Quick question for the comments. If
you've been through a judicial committee
or had a family member disfellowshipped,
what was the gap between what the
publications said the experience should
be and what it actually was? Let me know
in the comments.
So now we get to the question that
matters more than today's headline. What
does this tell us about what comes next?
Here's the institutional reality.
Religious freedom in democratic legal
systems is one of the strongest
protections that exists. Courts in
Norway, in the United States, in most of
Europe are extremely reluctant to
second-guess what a religious
organization teaches or how it
disciplines its members.
That reluctance is mostly a feature, not
a bug. Religious liberty matters, and
the alternative, where the government
decides which doctrines are acceptable,
is worse than the problem most of these
cases are trying to solve.
Ask yourself, would you rather live in a
world where Watch Tower can get away
with shunning, or would you rather live
in a world where the state decides what
all religions can and cannot teach and
practice?
That's the balance the courts have to
weigh in these decisions.
Watch Tower knows this. Their entire
legal posture in every country leans on
and exploits that, in my opinion.
Which means that direct attacks on the
doctrine of shunning, framed as
state-level interference with religious
teaching, are likely going to keep
losing in most countries. Norway just
lost. The United States stopped trying
decades ago. The European Court of Human
Rights has consistently sided with
religious organizations on internal
discipline questions. Though there may
be a path when it comes to parental
alienation based on how some laws are
changing, at least here in the United
States. The law hasn't caught up with
that yet. We'll have to see how that
goes. France recently changed its laws
to make it easier to get at high-control
groups like Jehovah's Witnesses as well,
and there are other legal battles in
places like Japan that are working to
protect children from this cult. All is
not lost, but the attack vectors are
changing because the way the law is
written and the way religious
protections are upheld in courts, it's a
very, very hard road to hoe.
Courts have acknowledged the harm of the
practice while refusing to act against
it due to religious freedom protections.
With most of the consequences now moved
from formal judicial committees to
informal social response within the
Jehovah's Witness community, it's even
harder to prove that Watch Tower's
leaders are forcing this from the top
down.
From the outside, it looks like each
individual's decision of who to
associate with or not.
But here's where it gets interesting
because there's another legal front, and
it's moving in the opposite direction.
In Mexico recently, a Witness elder used
his country's federal data protection
law to block a judicial committee from
convening against him. He didn't argue
that disfellowshipping is wrong. He
didn't ask anyone to rule on a religious
teaching. He invoked a right that
belonged to him as an individual
citizen, and the proceedings stopped
before they ever started. There wasn't
any religious freedom defense available
to the Watch Tower because the case
wasn't about religion. It was about
data.
In Brazil, a court took the legal theory
a step further. A Jehovah's Witness man
revoked consent for his personal data
under Brazil's data protection law. The
elders disfellowshipped him publicly
anyway. He sued, and he didn't ask for
money. He asked the court to order the
congregation to publicly retract the
announcement from the same platform
where it was originally read and to
declare that no member could be punished
for staying in contact with them. The
court granted it with a daily fine for
non-compliance.
He didn't sue over shunning. He didn't
ask anyone to rule on the
disfellowshipping doctrine. The case
wasn't about religion. It was about what
happens when a religious organization
processes a citizen's data after he's
told them not to.
In Spain, an appellate court recently
ruled that former members are within
their rights to publicly characterize
Jehovah's Witnesses as a destructive
sect. Watch Tower argued defamation. The
court held the speech is protected
because it's backed by factual testimony
from ex-members. Again, the case wasn't
about religious doctrine. It was about
an individual's right to describe their
own experience.
What those wins have in common is that
they don't ask a court to decide whether
a religious teaching is good or bad.
They ask whether an individual's rights
are being respected. Data protection
law, defamation framework, freedom of
speech. These are rights that belong to
the person, not defenses that belong to
an institution. And when the legal
question is about an individual right,
the religious freedom shield doesn't
apply because there's nothing to shield
against.
That's the asymmetric battlefield, and I
think it's where the real movement is
going to come from. Watch Tower can
rewrite a study article. They can't
rewrite a citizen's right to access
their own data. They can quietly delete
a 2017 broadcast. They can't quietly
delete a court order requiring them to
disclose what's in someone's
congregation file.
For the Witnesses watching this, and I
know some of you are, pay close
attention to how today's ruling gets
reported on jw.org. The talking point is
going to be vindication. Religious
freedom upheld. Jehovah's people
protected.
The thing you won't hear is that two of
Norway's most senior judges read the
same publications you read every week
and concluded that what those
publications describe isn't what's
actually happening in the congregations.
Here's what I keep coming back to.
Five judges read the same documents.
Three of them concluded that the
rulebook accurately describes the
practice. Two of them concluded it
doesn't. The fact that the split came
out three to two, not five to zero in
either direction, is itself a piece of
information about what's going on inside
this organization.
The case was close enough that the
dissent's reasoning is on the record of
Norway's Supreme Court. Two senior
justices saying in writing that
exclusion does sever family contact, and
that does constitute undue pressure to
remain. That reasoning is now available
to other courts that come to this
question next.
What you just saw is one moment in a
60-year pattern. My documentary, From
Cookie to Cult: The History of Jehovah's
Witnesses, is that pattern at full
length. The way today's ruling came
down, the language Watch Tower used, the
documents the court relied on, the
careful decades of preparation that
turned the published policy into a legal
shield, none of it makes much sense in
isolation, but it makes perfect sense as
the latest move in a much longer arc.
So start there. The machinery is easier
to see once you've watched the whole
thing assemble itself. Click that icon
in the corner to watch that now. I'll
see you there. I wanted to pause for a
second to ask for your support by
becoming a channel member of the channel
by clicking the join button below. It
starts at a whopping $4 a month. If that
won't break the bank for you, it helps
me be able to produce more content like
this. If it would break the bank for
you, by all means, just keep watching.
Thank you in advance for your generous
support.
>> Oh.
>> [music]